Info	  271B	  
Fall	  2013	  
	  

Lab	  2:	  	  Basic	  Statistical	  Tests	  

	  
Introduction.	  
	  
In	  this	  lab,	  you	  will	  work	  in	  groups	  of	  two	  to	  write	  your	  own	  R	  script	  and	  perform	  an	  
analysis	  on	  data	  from	  the	  General	  Social	  Survey	  (GSS).	  	  Your	  group	  should	  submit	  two	  files:	  	  
	  
1. A	  script	  file	  (.R)	  containing	  your	  program	  code	  
a. Include	  a	  title	  section	  containing	  your	  full	  names,	  program	  description,	  
approximate	  time	  it	  took	  to	  complete	  the	  lab,	  and	  whether	  you	  mind	  me	  
using	  your	  results	  as	  a	  class	  example.	  
b. Include	  comments	  before	  each	  logical	  section	  of	  the	  program,	  explaining	  
what	  it	  does	  
c. Label	  your	  variables	  clearly	  
d. Name	  this	  file	  your-­‐last-­‐names-­‐lab2.R	  
	  
2. A	  commented	  log	  /	  output	  file	  containing	  your	  results	  
a. Please	  use	  .doc	  or	  .pdf	  format	  
b. Include	  the	  important	  output	  from	  running	  your	  script	  with	  comments,	  as	  
well	  as	  your	  discussion,	  and	  graphs	  that	  you	  generate	  
c. Name	  this	  file	  your-­‐last-­‐names-­‐lab2.doc	  or	  .pdf	  
	  
Place	  both	  files	  in	  a	  zip	  folder,	  named	  your-­‐last-­‐names-­‐lab2.zip,	  and	  email	  them	  to	  
agswigart	  at	  ischool.berkeley.edu.	  	  Please	  title	  your	  email	  “lab2	  submission”	  
	  
All	  files	  are	  due	  at	  3:30pm	  on	  Thursday,	  Nov	  14.	  
	  
Data.	  	  	  
	  
Every	  other	  year,	  the	  General	  Social	  Survey	  collects	  responses	  to	  thousands	  of	  questions,	  
covering	  a	  wide	  variety	  of	  topics.	  	  	  You	  will	  be	  using	  a	  subset	  of	  data	  from	  1993,	  including	  a	  
small	  number	  of	  variables,	  which	  is	  available	  on	  the	  course	  website.	  
	  
While	  some	  variables	  may	  be	  self-­‐explanatory,	  others	  may	  not	  make	  sense	  until	  you	  look	  at	  
the	  GSS	  codebook.	  	  An	  easy	  way	  to	  investigate	  a	  variable	  is	  to	  look	  it	  up	  in	  the	  GSS	  
mnemonic	  index,	  located	  at:	  
	  
http://www3.norc.org/GSS+Website/Browse+GSS+Variables/Mnemonic+Index/	  
	  
Before	  you	  run	  a	  statistical	  test	  on	  a	  variable,	  you	  should	  always	  read	  its	  description	  in	  the	  
codebook,	  in	  order	  to	  understand	  what	  different	  values	  mean.	  	  For	  example,	  the	  codebook	  

may	  explain	  if	  certain	  values	  stand	  for	  missing	  data.	  	  If	  this	  occurs,	  you	  should	  make	  sure	  
those	  values	  are	  recorded	  as	  NA	  in	  R	  before	  proceeding.	  
	  
Like	  any	  survey,	  GSS	  data	  creates	  additional	  concerns	  that	  would	  normally	  go	  into	  a	  
statistical	  analysis.	  	  Surveys	  are	  usually	  weighted	  in	  order	  to	  compensate	  for	  over-­‐	  or	  
under-­‐representation	  of	  subgroups.	  	  For	  this	  lab,	  however,	  you	  will	  be	  using	  unweighted	  
data,	  which	  limits	  how	  well	  your	  findings	  generalize	  to	  the	  U.S.	  population.	  
	  
Program	  Requirements.	  	  	  
	  
Write	  a	  well-­‐commented	  R	  script	  to	  perform	  each	  of	  the	  following	  tasks,	  following	  the	  best	  
practices	  described	  in	  class.	  	  For	  each	  new	  variable,	  look	  for	  obvious	  errors	  and	  make	  sure	  
that	  appropriate	  values	  are	  coded	  as	  NA.	  	  In	  your	  comments,	  please	  document	  any	  recoding	  
you	  perform,	  and	  all	  the	  assumptions	  you	  must	  check	  before	  administering	  a	  test.	  	  Then	  
explain	  how	  you	  select	  the	  correct	  test	  variety	  (e.g.	  parametric	  versus	  non-­‐parametric)	  
	  
1. Comparing	  means	  
a. Create	  a	  binary	  variable	  based	  on	  a	  categorical	  variable	  with	  more	  than	  two	  
categories.	  
b. Select	  a	  metric	  variable	  (or	  an	  ordinal	  variable,	  but	  you	  may	  have	  to	  place	  it	  
in	  the	  as.numeric	  function	  before	  conducting	  a	  test),	  and	  perform	  an	  analysis	  
to	  determine	  if	  the	  mean	  of	  this	  variable	  is	  significantly	  different	  between	  the	  
two	  groups	  you	  created	  in	  part	  a.	  	  	  
c. In	  your	  write-­‐up,	  describe	  your	  null	  and	  alternate	  hypotheses,	  and	  comment	  
on	  the	  significance	  of	  your	  findings.	  
2. Measuring	  correlation	  
a. Select	  two	  metric	  variables,	  and	  perform	  an	  analysis	  to	  see	  if	  they	  share	  a	  
linear	  relationship.	  	  	  
b. In	  your	  write-­‐up,	  examine	  the	  scatterplot	  of	  the	  variables	  and	  relate	  it	  to	  
your	  test	  results.	  	  Comment	  on	  the	  type	  of	  relationship	  you	  find.	  	  Finally,	  
describe	  what	  you	  think	  might	  be	  going	  on	  (or	  not)	  between	  the	  variables.	  
3. Testing	  independence	  
a. Select	  two	  categorical	  variables,	  and	  perform	  an	  analysis	  to	  see	  if	  they	  are	  
independent	  of	  each	  other.	  	  Check	  to	  see	  which	  combinations	  are	  driving	  
your	  result,	  and	  comment	  on	  their	  significance.	  	  Finally,	  comment	  on	  what	  
you	  think	  might	  be	  going	  on	  (or	  not)	  between	  the	  variables.	  

